Build-To-Sell Powered By IA

Build-To-Sell Powered By Intellectual Assets: 
A High-Growth Technology Business Perspective

By Juergen Graner

Abstract

Owners of high-growth technology businesses should 
decide  at  an  early  stage  whether  they  are  developing 
their company for continuation as an independent or-
ganization  (build-to-grow)  or  for  an  exit  (build-to-sell). 
The choice of one pathway over the other has a huge 
impact on the strategic decisions made when building a 
successful business.

The three key intellectual assets—technology, brand, 
and operational excellence—are dominant value drivers 
for an exit deal in a build-to-sell process. Developing a 
sound  portfolio  of  intellectual  assets  over  many  years 
before the exit will not only provide the business own-
ers with an increased exit valuation, it will also give the 
company  a  sustainable  competitive  advantage  in  the 
event a planned exit does not take place or is delayed.

When  a  build-to-sell  choice  is  made,  a  dedicated 
board  function  should  have  the  prime  responsibility 
for the salability of the business, allowing the CEO to 
remain focused on the growth of the business. Contin-
uous management of the exit process years in advance 
and for some time after the exit transaction is crucial for 
ultimate exit success.
1. Introduction

Most  owners  of  high-growth  technology  busi-

nesses  will,  at  some  point  in  their  life,  be 
faced with the decision to sell their company. 
There are numerous reasons for wanting such an exit. 
The biggest challenge is that when the possibility aris-
es, the vast majority of business owners are not  pre-
pared for this milestone in their life as entrepreneurs. 
They are often driven by the process of an exit, instead 
of driving it proactively with a professionally managed 
build-to-sell  strategy  that  optimizes  the  business  for 
the best possible deal. As intellectual assets generally 
need years to be established, and are often the key val-
ue drivers for an exit deal, this calls for a process that 
starts many years before an intended sale. Moreover, 
it is also important to ensure management continuity 
for some time following the exit transaction. Business 
owners should decide early on whether they intend to 
follow  a  build-to-grow  or  a  build-to-sell  strategy  and 
then develop their company accordingly.
2. Build-to-Grow vs. Build-to-Sell

Build-to-grow  and  build-to-sell  are  two  fundamen-
tally  different  strategies  open  to  the  business  leader 
when building a company. 

The ultimate goal when employing a build-to-grow 
strategy is to continue the business in perpetuity. On 
the  other  hand,  a  build-to-sell  strategy  has  the  clear 
goal  of  selling  the  business  at  a  certain  point  in  the 
future. Key strategic decisions are made with this goal 
in mind and differ if the time horizon is one to three 
years, three to five years, or five to ten years. For ex-
ample, it would make no sense to invest in building a 
large  new  factory  with  a  one-to  three-year  exit  time 
horizon, since the construction work alone would take 
two years, and the potential purchasers may not even 
be  interested  in  an  additional  manufacturing  facility. 
Anything significantly below a 12-month time horizon 
tends  to  be  a  patch-to-sell  approach  with  limited  op-
tions for creating value.

When asked whether they would like to sell their 
company,  many  business  owners  reply  with,  “I  am 
willing  to  sell  if  the  right  offer  comes  along.”  How-
ever,  from  a  marketing  strategy  perspective,  this  is 
a fundamentally flawed statement. No marketing ex-
pert  would  ever  say  that  they  will  think  about  the 
customer  only  once  their  products  or  services  are 
market-ready.  Successful  marketing  starts  with  the 
customer in mind, way before the product or service 
offering has been finalized.

If a business in build-to-grow mode wants to succeed 
in  selling  its  products  or  services,  the  sole  business 
driver  will  be  the  customer’s  needs.  By  contrast,  a 
business following a build-to-sell strategy has two busi-
ness drivers: first, the needs of customers who actually 
buy the products or services, and second, the needs of 
potential buyers of the company. Opting for build-to-
sell therefore requires a business to cater to two differ-
ent customer groups that are not necessarily aligned.

To  secure  continuation  over  a  long  period  of  time 
(often many generations) under a build-to-grow strat-
egy,  it  is  generally  helpful  to  expand  the  scope  and 
diversify into different markets. Some markets change 
direction more frequently than others. Market change 
is  inevitable,  however.  Sometimes  a  whole  industry 
might  be  endangered  by  unforeseeable  external  fac-
tors. A good example of this is the recent coronavirus 
crisis,  during  which  the  hotel  industry  was  serious-
ly  impacted  without  prior  warning.  A  company  with 
some  level  of  diversification  would  have  been  much 
better prepared to sustain such a crisis. However, with 
the sudden increased demand for toilet paper in many 
countries,  who  could  have  known  that  being  in  the 

121

les NouvellesBuild-To-Sell Powered By IA

toilet  paper  business  would  have  been  a  good  crisis 
hedging strategy for a hotel business? When opting for 
a build-to-sell strategy, on the other hand, it is better 
to focus on and adopt a specialization pathway as po-
tential  buyers  are  generally  in  the  market  for  some-
thing very specific. As a rule, the more an acquisition 
target fits into a clearly defined box, the easier it is to 
find buyers who are prepared to pay a premium for it. 
Moreover,  a  specialized  business  is  usually  easier  to 
integrate, since the new owner does not have to spend 
months  or  years  disposing  of  add-on  elements  that 
were acquired but do not fit the acquirer’s strategy.

Figure 1. Build-To-Grow vs. 
Build-To-Sell Strategy 

Build-to-Grow 
Strategy

Build-to-Sell 
Strategy

Ultimate Goal

Continuation

Exit at time X

Business Driver

Customers

Customers and 
Acquirers

Scope

Diversification

Specialization

As described above and shown in Figure 1, opting for 
a build-to-grow versus a build-to-sell strategy has a signif-
icant impact on how the business is developed and what 
strategic decisions are made. When building a company, 
settling on a strategy and deciding when to transition to 
a build-to-sell strategy is key at an early stage. This does 
not mean that the strategy cannot be re-evaluated every 
year. However, it is better to have a clear understanding 
of where the journey is heading from the start. Hope is 
simply not a good business strategy.
2.1 Build-to-Grow Strategy

The most common reasons for adopting a build-to-

sell strategy are:
Family Legacy

When the intention is to pass the business on from 
one  generation  to  another  within  a  family,  the  ob-
vious  strategy  is  build-to-grow.  To  be  effective,  this 
strategy  needs  to  ensure  a  proper  handover  to  the 
next leadership. Companies that are successful with 
a family legacy business generally have a well-defined 
process of how future CEOs develop their skills and 
abilities  in  non-affiliated  companies.  This  ensures 
higher respect for the successor and offers an oppor-
tunity to bring a new way of thinking into the compa-
ny from the outside.
Lifestyle Business Choice

For  some  reason,  a  lifestyle  business  often  has  a 
negative  connotation  in  the  management  education 
realm  as  a  business  that  is  not  pursuing  maximum 
growth.  However,  there  is  nothing  wrong  with  run-

ning  a  business  with  the  primary  goal  of  job  satis-
faction  and  providing  the  funding  required  for  the 
owner’s  lifestyle.  It  is  a  perfectly  good  choice  and 
generally  the  route  to  follow  when  the  owner  em-
ploys a build-to-grow strategy, provided growth is ac-
tually  desired.  In  addition,  a  lifestyle  business  does 
not necessarily mean a small company.
Going Public

■ Juergen Graner, 
Founder and CEO, 
Globalator,
San Diego, California  USA
E-mail: office@globalator.com

While the strategy of de-
veloping a company to be-
come a publicly listed enti-
ty through an IPO could be 
considered a separate strat-
egy type (build-to-IPO), for 
the purpose of this article 
it is classified as a build-to-
grow strategy rather than a build-to-sell strategy. Gener-
ally, the purpose of an IPO is to ensure the continuation 
of the business  with  the opportunity of  getting easier 
access to funding for planned growth. When a company 
is primed for an IPO, one key preparation is establishing 
highly professional operation and management systems 
that are adequate for a listed entity.
2.2 Build-to-Sell Strategy

The most common reasons for adopting a build-to-

sell strategy are:
Investor Requirement

High-growth  technology  businesses  often  have  such 
significant  capital  requirements  that  bootstrapping 
(building a company without external equity financing) 
is not an option. Moreover, since debt funding is limited 
by the collateral that a business owner can put up, most 
high-growth businesses require equity funding. The ma-
jority of equity financing comes from funds with a lim-
ited lifetime (usually 10 years). Therefore, they need to 
cash in on their investment to realize a positive return 
on  investment  at  some  point.  This  means  that  equity 
funding  generally  comes  with  the  requirement  for  a 
build-to-sell strategy and a time frame dictated by the 
remaining life of the fund providing the money.
Personal Risk Reduction

Sooner  or  later,  many  long-term  business  owners 
realize that their wealth is trapped in their company. 
At the same time, even the most successful business-
es  will  fail  at  some  point  due  to  internal  or  external 
factors.  At  an  all-hands  meeting  in  November  2018, 
Jeff Bezos told his employees “I predict one day Ama-
zon will fail. Amazon will go bankrupt... We have to try 
and delay that day for as long as possible.”1 With that 
realization,  it  is  logical  that  many  first-time  business 

1.  See  article  on  CNBC  online  on  15  Nov.  2018—https://
www.cnbc.com/2018/11/15/bezos-tells-employees-one-day-
amazon-will-fail-and-to-stay-hungry.html

122

June 2022owners in particular will want to “cash in their chips.” 
Some  will  become  serial  entrepreneurs,  starting  one 
business after another. Others will simply retire, enjoy 
life and/or become angel investors. In general, selling 
a high-growth technology business is a positive, life-al-
tering experience for entrepreneurs as it allows them 
to do what their investors do: diversify their risk.
Big Cash-Out

There  are  few  ways  of  achieving  a  major  cash-out 
event, besides inheritance (not everyone is born into a 
wealthy family), marriage (not everyone wants to look 
for a spouse with the right monetary background), and 
luck (the chances of winning the lottery are not con-
sidered to be very high). One opportunity is to become 
an entrepreneur and sell the business. Apart from ei-
ther already having or developing the skills needed to 
be an entrepreneur, employing a proactive build-to-sell 
strategy from the very beginning can significantly in-
crease the chances of a big cash-out event.
3. The Anatomy of a Successful Exit

Most business owners make the mistake of treating 
the  sale  of  their  business  as  a  situation  to  be  tack-
led  when  the  time  is  right.  In  many  cases,  however, 
some unforeseen event triggers the exit process. Such 
events include the proactive approach of a potential-
ly  interested  party,  the  unexpected  deterioration  of 
the  owner’s  personal  health  due  to  stress,  and  the 
slowdown or even decline of business growth due to 
market  changes.  The  problem  with  all  these  triggers 
is  that  they  start  forcing  the  unprepared  owner  into 
a  short-term  exit  process.  Investment  bankers,  M&A 
advisors,  and  business  brokers  jump  to  the  rescue, 
start the transaction phase and try their best to close 
a deal. Nonetheless, their job is neither to develop a 
business  nor  to  ensure  its  integration  with  the  new 
owner, but simply to close the best possible deal un-
der the given circumstances. A proactive build-to-sell 
process starting at least one year before a business is 
sold (the earlier, the better) and managed from within 

the company is the best insurance for business own-
ers  to  optimize  their  value,  retain  control,  and  drive 
exit  opportunities,  instead  of  being  driven  by  them. 
In reality, a successful exit transaction is not an event 
but a journey, where value is accumulated during the 
development  phase,  captured  during  the  transaction 
phase, and secured during the implementation phase 
(see Figure 2).2 
3.1. Development Phase

The  first  step  when  embarking  on  a  build-to-sell 
strategy is understanding the expectations for the end 
of the journey through an orientation  process. The 
owner has to define what they want to get out of the 
exit and what the expected timing is. For some own-
ers, financial gain alone is key; others consider it vital 
that their employees and/or the established brand have 
a future after the business is sold. The personal exit 
timing  might  be  determined  by  a  certain  age  of  the 
owner  or  by  a  targeted  market  position,  achieved  by 
the company to optimize the sales price. Expectations 
are  as  different  as  people  and  no  two  situations  are 
alike. This becomes even more complicated if there is 
more than one owner, because all expectations need to 
be aligned first to define a solid build-to-sell strategy.

When the expectations for the exit are clear, a fea-
sibility  process  submits  these  and  major  strategic 
decisions  to  a  reality  check.  Feasibility  discussions 
may  already  take  place  during  the  orientation  phase 
and  sometimes  a  negative  feasibility  check  can  bring 
the process back to this phase. One example is if the 
company decides to make one or more acquisitions to 
achieve a size that is attractive to potential buyers. It 
may be necessary to verify the availability of such tar-
gets and the funding of the acquisitions. A significant 
acquisition in a one- to three-year build-to-sell process 
might  not  be  feasible  but  could  realistically  be  man-
aged in a time-frame of three to five years.

2. See also the article, “People as Enablers,” co-authored by 

Juergen Graner, les Nouvelles, June 2020.

Figure 2. A Successful Business Exit Transaction

Development Phase

Transaction Phase

Implementation Phase

e
l
c
y
C
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
m

i
t
p
O

1. Orientation

2. Feasibility

3. Development

123

4. Preparation

6. Alignment

5. Transaction

7. Integration

les NouvellesBuild-To-Sell Powered By IA 
Once a strategy has been determined and evaluated 
through a feasibility process, the actual development 
process can begin. This is where the real value is add-
ed to the business. It is also the point where a list of 
potential  buyers  is  drawn  up  and  their  needs  analyz-
ed to understand what kind of company would attract 
enough potential buyers who fulfill the expectations of 
the owner(s). Alliances might be formed with potential 
buyers to get on their radar. Licensing deals might be 
made to strengthen the intellectual property portfolio 
or  close  gaps  in  the  freedom-to-operate  status  quo. 
Spin-offs might be established to create the possibility 
of serial exits or enable the owner to sell one part of 
the business and keep another. Acquisitions might be 
made to enhance the growth of the company. Business 
units that do not contribute to the value of the busi-
ness from a buyer’s perspective might be discontinued 
or sold. In fact, this whole development phase is where 
the  ultimate  value  is  either  created  or  lost.  It  is  also 
when the intellectual asset portfolio (see Section 4 be-
low) needs to be established since all key intellectual 
assets (technology, brand, and operational excellence) 
take  years  to  build.  Once  the  development  process 
begins,  a  regular  optimization  cycle  should  be  main-
tained to re-evaluate whether what was determined in 
the orientation process is still valid, and whether the 
development strategy needs adapting.
3.2. Transaction Phase

A  business  with  a  proactive  build-to-sell  process  in 
place  is  not  only  able  to  start  the  transaction  phase 
when the time is right, it is also well prepared to deal 
with unexpected events that might trigger an exit. The 
starting point of this phase is usually the development 
of an information memorandum, which is a sales doc-
ument that allows potential buyers to declare their in-
terest in an acquisition. The preparation process also 
includes a more detailed analysis of potential acquirers. 
While a well-prepared business has already maintained 
a list of potential buyers throughout the development 
phase, this is the time to expand that list and possibly 
disqualify potential contenders. It is also  the  time to 
decide whether not only strategic buyers but also pri-
vate equity funds might be considered as potential ac-
quirers. Private equity funds can be a great option for 
smaller businesses that still need to be built further for 
a successful sale, but where the owner already wants 
to cash out. In many cases, these funds prefer to buy 
only  a  portion  of  the  business,  provide  some  needed 
growth  capital,  and  keep  the  owner  on  board  until  a 
full exit takes place at a later date.

Once all preparations are complete, the actual trans-
action process can begin. One important decision is 
whether  to  adopt  a  broad  or  a  narrow  approach.  A 
broad approach has the advantage that every potential 
buyer is invited to a structured process. The disadvan-

tage of the broad approach is that the whole industry 
will find out that the company is for sale. This can limit 
the continuation of the business should the exit pro-
cess be stopped for any reason and the company con-
tinue as a standalone entity. The reason for this is that 
players in the industry may well be reluctant to work 
with a business that might be sold in the next attempt. 
The  narrow  approach  has  the  advantage  that  knowl-
edge of an intended sale can be limited  to  a  few  se-
lected companies, avoiding backlashes if the business 
continues  without  an  exit.  The  downside  is  that  the 
limitation to fewer targets might miss a potential buyer 
for the best possible deal. In the end, there are many 
shades  between  approaching  hundreds  of  companies 
versus  only  one;  making  a  conscious  decision,  based 
on a clear analysis of advantages and disadvantages in 
each particular case, is key.
3.3. Implementation Phase

Once  the  deal  is  signed  and  the  transaction  con-
cluded,  the  implementation  phase  can  begin.  Unless 
the acquisition was made by the buyer to operate the 
business  without  any  significant  changes  or  to  close 
down  the  acquired  entity,  this  is  where  things  often 
start  to  go  wrong.  Integrating  a  business  is  an  art  in 
itself. According to an article in Harvard Business Re-
view,  70  to  90  percent  of  acquisitions  are  abysmal 
failures.3 The main reason why successful implemen-
tation matters, not only to the buyers but also to the 
sellers, is that earnout payments (see Section 4) can 
represent a significant portion of a deal and depend on 
the success during or after the implementation phase. 
Another “soft factor” is that most owners want to see 
the business continue, and many find it important to 
secure the future of their trusted employees. A solid 
build-to-sell process that was established years before 
the  transaction  phase  and  ensures  the  building  of  a 
business ready for integration with a potential acquir-
er  will  make  the  acquisition  more  attractive  for  the 
buyer  and  create  a  win-win  situation  for  both  seller 
and  buyer.  For  this  to  happen,  a  business  embarking 
on a build-to-sell strategy should establish an in-house 
function at the board level that has the responsibility 
for overseeing the development phase towards an exit, 
the  transaction  phase,  and  that  continues  to  stay  in-
volved during the initial alignment process, ensuring 
a sustainable success of the transaction.

When  the  alignment  process  has  determined  how 
the  future  joint  business  will  work,  the  integration 
process kicks in. This is where the build-to-sell board 
function  starts  fading  out  to  ensure  the  handover  to 
the new business owner runs smoothly. If the process 
was managed correctly, the seller will not only receive 

3. See article “M&A: The One Thing You Need to Get Right.” 

by Roger L. Martin, Harvard Business Review, June 2016

124

June 2022Build-To-Sell Powered By IAthe  adjusted  purchase  price  but  also  most  of  the  es-
crow  holdback  and  the  maximum  achievable  earnout 
payment  (see  Section  4  and  Figure  3).  Generally  the 
seller’s goal is the perfect deal that ensures the best 
possible financial return for the seller, a business per-
forming above expectations for the buyer, and a secure 
future for the employees of the company. While it will 
not always work perfectly, choosing a proactive build-
to-sell process favors the best possible outcome. 
4. The Role of Intellectual Assets for the 
Exit Deal

Intellectual assets are of fundamental importance for 
a successful exit deal. Since they cannot be established 
at short notice prior to a pending exit, the process of 
building a sound intellectual asset portfolio must begin 
many years beforehand, during the development phase 
(see  Section  3).  As  mentioned  above,  the  ideal  exit 
deal ensures that, in addition to the initial payment at 
closing, the buyer releases the majority of the escrow 
holdback and the seller receives the maximum possible 
earnout  payment  from  the  performance  of  the  busi-
ness under the new ownership (see Figure 3).

For the purpose of this article, the purchase price is 
the overall price that the buyer is willing to pay to ac-
quire the business. In case of an equity deal, the buyer 
receives  full  ownership  in  the  seller’s  company  (pro-
vided they buy 100 percent of the business, although 
in some cases the buyer might only acquire a certain 
percentage). In the event of an asset deal, the buyer 
purchases only specific assets of the business.

As  a  rule,  however,  the  purchase  price  is  not  the 
amount  that  the  seller  will  receive  once  the  deal  is 
closed. In most cases, the buyer will require the seller 

to provide binding promises (contractually fixed under 
representations, warranties, and indemnifications) that 
certain  assumptions  about  the  business  are  correct. 
One simple example is that the inventory actually rep-
resents the value claimed by the seller. To secure these 
promises,  the  buyer  will  ask  that  a  certain  portion  of 
the purchase price (depending on the industry and the 
risks perceived by the buyer) be deposited in an escrow 
account as an escrow holdback, managed by an escrow 
agent.  This  escrow  holdback  is  subsequently  released 
either to the seller or to the buyer, based on contractu-
ally defined terms and timelines. The initial price paid 
is thus the adjusted purchase price, calculated as the 
agreed purchase price minus the escrow holdback de-
posited  in  an  escrow  account,  ownership  of  which  is 
only determined throughout the escrow period.

Companies  that  have  been  set  up  for  high  perfor-
mance  under  new  ownership  through  a  solid  build-
to-sell process and supported by a strong intellectual 
asset portfolio have the potential to benefit from an ad-
ditional earnout agreement. An earnout provides sup-
plementary payments over and above the agreed pur-
chase price for achieving defined performance criteria. 
In most cases, these performance criteria are based on 
sales performance. However, along with countless oth-
er options, they could also include certain milestones 
in  a  product  development  process.  While  the  escrow 
holdback  has  the  potential  to  reduce  the  agreed  pur-
chase price, the earnout paid adds to it. The tricky part 
about receiving earnouts is that, by this point, control 
over the performance has shifted to the new owner, and 
any success depends not only on the right preparation 
on the part of the seller, but also on the cooperation of 
the  buyer.  While  certain  requirements  may  be  put  in 

Figure 3. The Ideal Exit Deal

GENERAL ASSETS

Adjusted Purchase Price

Purchase Price

_

Escrow Holdback
Kept

+

Earnout
Paid

=

EXIT DEAL

INTELLECTUAL ASSETS

Technology

Brand

Operational 
Excellence

125

les NouvellesBuild-To-Sell Powered By IAplace by the seller to enable earnout performance, the 
main driver here is business logic combined with man-
agement support from the seller’s team.

The following example from the life sciences indus-
try illustrates the possible impact of escrow holdback 
and earnout on the actual amount received by the sell-
er (parameters depend on the individual situation and 
the  industry).  With  a  purchase  price  of  $50  million, 
plus a 20 percent escrow holdback and a $20 million 
earnout, the difference between a worst-case scenar-
io  (all  the  escrow  holdback  is  kept  by  the  buyer  and 
no earnout is paid=$40 million exit deal value) and a 
best-case  scenario  (the  entire  escrow  holdback  is  re-
leased to the seller and the full earnout is achieved = 
$70 million) would be $30 million. This translates to a 
75 percent higher overall exit price if the business was 
well prepared in a build-to-sell process and the imple-
mentation phase went according to plan. Intellectual 
assets are major contributors to and increase the likeli-
hood of a higher purchase price in the first place and a 
higher overall exit deal.4 
4.1. Impact of General Assets 

General  assets  typically  include  customers  (ex-
pressed in revenue), cost structure (expressed in gross 
margin and profitability), established contracts, equip-
ment, inventory, work in progress and team members. 
As the foundation of any business valuation, they have 
a  substantial  impact  on  the  purchase  price  because 
they are relatively easy for the acquirer to evaluate in 
a  due  diligence  process.  Since  an  escrow  agreement 
needs  clear  trigger  points  to  determine  whether  the 
seller or the buyer receives the retained funds, general 
assets  also  have  a  huge  impact  on  the  escrow  hold-
back. While general assets may serve as the foundation 
of an earnout (e.g., equipment with significant spare 
capacity enables the sales team to sell more products), 
their impact on it is usually low. See Figure 4.

Figure 4. General Assets 

Purchase 
Price

Escrow 
Holdback

Earnout

General Assets

High

High

Low

4.2. Impact of Technology Intellectual Assets
Strong technology intellectual assets (IA) combine the 
technology intellectual property mainly secured by pat-
ents and trade secrets with the know-how of the team.
For  a  company  with  a  strong  technology  portfolio, 

4.  For  more  information  on  intellectual  assets  as  value 
drivers  for  strategic  transactions,  see  also  the  article, 
“Transactions  Powered  by  Intellectual  Assets,”  by  Juergen 
Graner, les Nouvelles, June 2020.

the  impact  of  technology  on  the  purchase  price  can 
be significant, especially when it gives the business a 
sustainable  competitive  advantage.  For  example,  pat-
ent-protected  technology  with  a  clear  enforcement 
and freedom-to-operate position that allows the com-
pany  to  exclude  competitors  for  a  relevant  period  of 
time increases value as the current performance and 
growth pattern is more likely to continue.

The impact of technology on the escrow holdback 
tends to be low, as it is relatively difficult to find trig-
ger points that would provide an escrow release pay-
ment  to  one  of  the  parties.  One  example  in  which 
technology might have an impact on the escrow hold-
back is a pending patent lawsuit that could threaten 
a business’ technology foundation where winning or 
losing patent litigation could determine the payout of 
an earmarked holdback.

From  an  earnout  perspective,  technology  can  have 
a high impact on an agreed earnout. This is especially 
true if, for example, the company owns platform tech-
nology that has been tried and tested in only one mar-
ket segment, but could be used to access one or several 
other markets. It could be part of an earnout payment 
based on future sales in those new markets, provided 
the buyer agrees to enter those markets shortly after 
the deal is completed. See Figure 5.

Figure 5. Technology
Intellectual Assets

Purchase 
Price

Escrow 
Holdback

Earnout

Technology IA

High

Low

High

 4.3. Impact of Brand Intellectual Assets

Strong  brand  intellectual  assets  (IA)  combine  the 
brand’s  intellectual  property  secured  by  trademarks 
with the ownership of customer mindshare, where in-
dividuals associate the brand with certain attributes.

A  strong  brand  almost  always  has  a  powerful  im-
pact  on  the  purchase  price  although  the  brand  value 
is  generally  higher  in  business-to-consumer  than  in 
business-to-business  focused  companies.  This  is  in-
teresting as, in most cases, the seller’s brand will be 
replaced  with  the  buyer’s  brand.  However,  having  a 
strong brand, where the task is not finding new cus-
tomers  who  have  positive  associations  with  it  but 
transferring  existing  positive  associations  to  a  new 
brand  in  a  controlled  step-by-step  process,  is  still  of 
great value to a buyer.

Since  a  brand  is  generally  easy  to  assess  in  a  due 
diligence process, the impact of the brand on the es-
crow holdback is almost always low. One situation in 
which an escrow holdback might be impacted by the 
brand is when the acquired company does not own a 

126

June 2022Build-To-Sell Powered By IAregistered trademark with an uncontested status  and 
there is reason to believe that the brand might actually 
violate existing trademark rights of another company.
Earnouts  are  usually  based  on  future  sales  per-
formance.  Since  great  sales  performance  builds  on 
a  strong  brand  that  has  been  established  over  many 
years, the impact of the brand on an earnout is general-
ly high. Moreover, the value increases if the buyer can 
use  the  seller’s  brand  to  expand  the  product  portfo-
lio quickly by targeting the seller’s existing customers 
with their own products. See Figure 6.

lence and it is easier to be integrated into the company 
structure of the buyer. Consequently, when the former 
CEO steps down and a new CEO takes over, a business 
with  operational  excellence  will  continue  to  perform: 
this performance secures the earnout payments. How-
ever, it is important that the seller still has someone in 
place  to  manage  the  transition  carefully  and  ensure  a 
smooth  handover.  This  role  is  ideally  performed  by  a 
person or a team that has been managing the build-to-
sell process since the development phase and is there-
fore very familiar with the company. See Figure 7.

Figure 7. Operational Excellence 
Intellectual Assets
Escrow 
Holdback

Purchase 
Price

Earnout

Operational 
Excellence IA
5. Conclusion

Low

Low

High

Intellectual assets are a significant contributor to the 
exit deal value and need to be established over many 
years during the development phase of a business (see 
Figure  8  for  an  overview  of  the  impact  of  different 
assets on the exit deal value).

The secret to the success of an optimized exit is un-
derstanding that different assets have a different im-
pact on the three key factors of an exit deal: purchase 
price,  escrow  holdback,  and  earnout.  General  assets 
have the highest impact on the adjusted purchase price 
(the purchase price minus the escrow holdback depos-
ited  in  an  escrow  account)  and  very  little  impact  on 
an  earnout.  Technology  and  brand  intellectual  assets 
generally have a high impact on the purchase price and 
very  limited  impact  on  the  escrow  holdback  but  are 
the key drivers for an earnout. Operational excellence 
is an inconsequential outlier in the intellectual asset 
class as its impact on the purchase price is more intrin-
sic. On the other hand, it is usually the most important 
driver for earnouts.

Therefore,  an  owner  of  a  high-growth  technolo-
gy  business  should  ensure  that  a  proactive  build-to-

Figure 6. Brand Intellectual Assets

Purchase 
Price

Escrow 
Holdback

Earnout

Brand IA

High

Low

High

 4.4. Impact of Operational Excellence 
Intellectual Assets 

Strong operational excellence intellectual assets (IA) 
allow a company to consistently outperform others and 
combine the operational excellence intellectual prop-
erty secured by the operational systems with a culture 
that enables operational excellence.

Interestingly enough, operational excellence rarely 
has a direct impact on the purchase price from a valu-
ation perspective. The reason is that it is very difficult 
to  prove  the  actual  level  of  operational  excellence 
in  a  company  in  a  common  due  diligence  process. 
Nevertheless,  since  operational  excellence  serves  a 
company in a build-to-sell process during the develop-
ment phase (see Section 3) and can ensure high sales 
growth,  a  high  gross  margin,  and  fast  product  time-
to-market, it has a significant intrinsic value affecting 
the purchase price. 

Generally  operational  excellence  does  not  have 
a  major  impact  on  the  escrow  holdback.  Although 
some  buyers  might  try  to  link  the  potential  loss  of 
key employees to an escrow trigger point, the truth 
is  that  this  issue  is  better  served  with  a  special  tie-
in  contract,  retaining  key  employees  for 
a  certain  period  of  time  with  defined 
bonus  payments.  Moreover,  it  would 
be  ver y  difficult  to  define  escrow  pay-
ment  release  trigger  points  for  under-
performance  in  terms  of  operational 
excellence. 

Figure 8. Overview Of The Impact Of 
Different Assets On The Exit Deal Value 

Purchase 
Price

Escrow 
Holdback

Earnout

High

High

High

Low

High

Low

Low

Low

Low

High

High

High

General Assets

Operational  excellence  really  shines 
when it comes to the earnout. A business 
developed for a sale through a solid build-
to-sell  process  will  have  established  at 
least  a  certain  level  of  operational  excel-

Intelletual Assets

Technology

Brand

Operational 
Excellence

127

les NouvellesBuild-To-Sell Powered By IAsell  process  is  initiated  at  an  early  stage,  developing 
a  solid  portfolio  of  intellectual  assets  to  secure  the 
value of the business. In the event an exit does not 
materialize  for  any  reason,  these  intellectual  assets 
will continue to be the backbone of the sustainable 
competitive advantage that the company has built. In 
any case, a business cannot go wrong with a strong 
intellectual asset portfolio.

Furthermore, if a business owner opts for a build-to-
sell strategy, they should establish a build-to-sell func-
tion at board level in their company that is tasked with 
guiding  the  company  from  the  development  phase 
through the transaction phase and into the implemen-

tation  phase.  The  business  owner  should  focus  on 
managing  day-to-day  operations  with  a  steady  eye  on 
the customers, while the build-to-sell function’s prime 
focus is the company’s salability. ■

Available at Social Science Research Network (SSRN): 

https://ssrn.com/abstract=4099758
Author

Juergen  Graner,  member  of  the  HTB  Task  Force  at 

EPO and the HGE Task Force at LESI. 
Acknowledgement 

Reviewer and editorial support was provided by Pat-
rick Monroe, Yasmin Law, Adéla Dvoráková, Ilja Rudyk 
and Thomas Bereuter.

128

June 2022Build-To-Sell Powered By IA